team_name: UNCC
model_name: HierBin
model_abbr: UNCC-hierbin
model_version: 2021-12-21
model_contributors: Shi Chen (UNC Charlotte Department of Public Health Sciences & School of Data Science) <schen56@uncc.edu>, Rajib Paul (UNC Charlotte Department of Public Health Sciences and School of Data Science) <rajib.paul@uncc.edu>, Daniel Janies (UNC Charlotte Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics) <djanies@uncc.edu>, Jean-Claude Thill (UNC Charlotte Department of Geography and Earth Sciences and School of Data Science) <jean-claude.thill@uncc.edu>
website_url: NA
license: cc-by-4.0
methods: Because of the complexity of socio-epidemiological system of COVID-19, we developed a data-driven, non-mechanistic statistical model to track and characterize and predict the cumulative case in 2021, assuming it follow certain asymptotic curves. In round #11 we choose a hybrid method with weighted average of both shorter and longer fitting period in order to capture both short-term and long-term dynamics of COVID-19 especially during the Delta-Omicron transition period, where the asymptomtotic behavior is challenging to track with a simple, single curve. We then projected cumulative case based on the developed model which served as the baseline scenario (no external processes such as changes in NPIs, vaccination campaigns including booster shots, new variant invasion, waning immunity etc.). The difference of daily cumulative case would be the baseline incident case. In order to model various scenarios, we develop the following methodology framework. Vaccination (including booster shots) was modeled as a time-dependent function to reduce incident case using the 2021 data when vaccines are administrated. From round #5/6 we also incoporated age-specific vaccination coverage as well as observed efficacy. Hospitalization was modeled as a binomial process of incident case and no overload of healthcare system was considered in 2021. Hospitalization rate was estimated as a function of vaccination rate (i.e., vaccination not only reduces incident case but also prevents severe disease prognosis that leads to hospitalization and death). We assumed that only severe condition patients required hospitalization (using in-patient data from HHS), and vaccination would reduce the prognosis from non-severe to severe. Similarly, death was modeled as a binomial process of hospitalization (from round #9, death was modeled as a binomial process of incident case with delayed effect), assuming all deaths occurred in hospitalized patients in severe condition. Deaths in long-term care facility or at home were not considered. Death rate was also another function of vaccination rate. To model new variants (Delta and future variants), we assumed a homogeneous initial prevalence (based on assumptions of different scenarios) across all states (though this can be relaxed to reflect more specific state-level variation in prevalence of new variants). We modeled new variants (Omicron) as an exclusively competitive strain, where it would take over the entire COVID-19 strain "population" by early 2022. Increased transmissibility is then modeled as a time-dependent function of the invasion of the new variant. The maximum increase are modeled either at 1x or 1.66x as directed by the instruction. However, we do include seasonality and potential human behavior into the model as an additional adjustment to increase transmissibility during the first few weeks (late 2021 and early 2022). To incorporate local events such as school opening and winter surge of cases, we use last year's case data to further calibrate local behavior of the model. In addition, during mixture time when the new variant had not taken over the entire host population, increased transmissibility would be modeled as a mixture of current variant (Delta) and the new variant (Omicron). Waning immunity was modeled implicitly as an approximation of immune escape (i.e., waning immunity causes immune escape), an exponential function with respective duration (e.g., 0.5-year or 0.2 year, estimated from current data). We assume the suscpetible pool is still large enough, so increasing incidence was modeled as a function of rate of waning immunity. Loss of protection to hospitalization and death were also modeled as a function of previously immune population percentage (i.e., sum of fully vaccinated and infected but still alive). For round #11, state-level child population was not considered.  

contact_tracing: NA
testing: NA
vaccine_efficacy_transmission: Efficacy of vaccine to reduce transmission was modeled as a state- and time-dependent function based on existing data in 2021.
vaccine_efficacy_delay: NA
vaccine_hesitancy: Vaccine hesitancy was implicitly modeled as an asympototic curve of vaccination rate in each state.
vaccine_immunity_duration: 0.5 year or 1 year, expotentially decay
natural_immunity_duration: same as vaccine-induced immunity
case_fatality_rate: CFR was estimated as a function of time (implicitly with vaccination rate) in each state with data in 2021.
infection_fatality_rate: NA
asymptomatics: NA
age_groups: All age groups, including 5-12yr (implicitly by data).
importations: NA for current version.
confidence_interval_method: Several assumptions were made to address uncertainty, e.g., system stochasticity from random noise, state-level variation in vaccination rate, state-level variation in lifting NPI mandate, etc.
calibration: 2021 cumulative case, hospitalization, and death data by state were used to model and calibrate the initial model. 2020 incident case data by state are also used to calibrate temporal behavior of the model.
spatial_structure: By state.
data_inputs: JHU case and death data, HHS hospitalization data, NYT vaccination data, KFF population demographic data.
